I guess, first of
all, I mean,
the images of this tunnel are just
kind of mind here.
What is your take on all this?
What was your reaction to that?
When you saw that?
Yeah, my my reaction is
this is what Israel
has been talking about
since the beginning of this conflict.
They knew that
these kind of tunnels existed.
I mean, we've been showing on
CNN the single file tunnels
that you almost have to squeeze through,
but you can't conduct an operation
of literally thousands of terrorist
when you're squeezing them all through.
So you're talking about a tunnel
in this case
that's 50 meters, about 200 feet
or so underground
that has the capability to hold weapons,
have large meeting spaces,
travel around and even bring vehicles in.
It's just
part of the network
that subterranean under the Gaza
Hamas has been
building for the last several
years, in fact, close to a decade.
And how they have been shifting
the money away
from the Palestinian citizens
to build these kind of things
to to
to construct their military apparatus.
And it's just it's just mind boggling.
It is.
But it also shows the difficulty
of fighting in this kind
of subterranean environment.
Yeah.
I mean, our Jeremy Diamond was saying
just a short while ago that,
I mean, this
this tunnel is almost big enough
or maybe big enough for vehicles
to move through.
I mean, that
that that is a different kind of tunnel.
There's no question about it.
And General, today
the IDF announced it's
taking control of parts of Khan
Younis in southern Gaza.
The Hamas
run health
ministry also reported
an Israeli airstrike in northern Gaza.
What's your sense of things right now?
I mean,
President Biden has been concerned
about what
he's described
as indiscriminate bombing in Gaza,
but what's your sense of where things
stand right now tonight?
I don't I'm not in concurrence, Jim,
with the the the indiscriminate bombing.
It may be somewhat excessive
and we could talk about that.
But, you know,
from the very beginning of this conflict,
starting a weeks ago,
you and I were talking about
how they would start in northern Gaza,
in Gaza City,
and then go to potentially Haim Yunis,
then to Karbala,
where and then even down south
into Rafah.
The Israeli government has said
this operation
will take many more months,
whereas many of the United States
administration is saying
they'd like to see
it ended in terms
of the kinetic operation
by the end of December.
I've said from the beginning,
I don't think that's going to happen,
given the size
and strength of the Hamas
terrorist groups
that are in these subterranean tunnels.
And we're seeing in each section of Gaza
that there are more
and more underground headquarters.
And Hamas has been very diligent in terms
of setting traps for the Israeli forces
as they go through.
So anyone that says,
hey, we ought to shift from
using airpower
to ground
and special operations forces,
that's easy to say on the outside.
But truthfully,
with some of the constructs
that we've seen, Hamas using
these underground networks
and some of the
uses of civilian buildings
have to be struck.
I think it will continue on.
Secretary Austin is going to discuss that
with the Israeli government
over the next couple of days.
But I think we're going to see
a continuation
of these kind of strikes
until Israel determines
that Hamas is defeated.
And I did want to ask you
about the three
Israeli hostages who were
mistakenly killed by the IDF.
We've talked
to a variety of people this week.
And so I certainly want to get your
your take on all of this.
When I spoke with the IDF spokesman,
Jonathan Conricus, yesterday,
I mean, he really didn't
indicate that there's
going to be a major shift
in their tactics or rules of engagement.
They're going to remind their soldiers
that they may come across hostages
from time to time
who have escaped captivity
and they need to be able
to recognize that.
But, I mean, the three men came out
of a building shirtless,
waving a white flag.
They were shot anyway.
The IDF says those troops
were not following
the proper rules of engagement.
But Colonel Conricus was saying, look,
you know,
we have Hamas
fighters who are
pretending to be civilians,
who are doing things
to draw in IDF forces to
entrap them and kill them.
It is such a
messy, chaotic
battlefield I'm wondering, General,
what's your advice on all this?
Well,
I don't have any advice, Jim,
but truthfully,
what I would say is Hamas
and any terrorist
organization is going to use deception
and trickery.
And you add to that
the fact of the conditions
of the battlefield, as you just said.
And I would bet that the hostages,
as they came
out of the building,
probably did not look like the Clean-Cut
young men
we see in their photos
that have been appearing on air.
They've been in captivity for two months.
The soldiers,
the Israeli soldiers
who were
always anxious
in any kind of firefight
with adrenaline surgeon,
and especially depending
on what their level of training
experience is.
You know, truthfully, Jim, I had
a fratricide incident in a command
I was in in Iraq.
And it devastates the individuals
who shoot their fellow citizens.
And in this case, I'm
sure it's not only devastated
whoever engaged those three hostages but
I would believe that
this is rippled
through the Israeli Defense Forces.
And they are attempting
to conduct their operations
according to rules of engagement.
But truthfully, as you just said,
the conditions on this
battlefield are extremely complex
and complicated.
You don't know who the enemy is
When people hop out of buildings,
especially buildings,
as the Israelis have been showing,
contain
a vast amount of ammunition
and they contain ambush sites.
It's very difficult to differentiate.
But I believe that the
Israeli Defense Forces
will review their rules of engagement.
And I know their chief of staff
has addressed this issue
with all of their soldiers
in the fight right now.
But it's tough.
It's really heartbreaking. Yeah,
very heartbreaking.
General Hertling,
great to have you on as always.
Thanks so much.